Success Formula.. The Secret of Success..
If you search for these phrases, you’ll
get a lot of results online. The images are
of poor quality… intentionally! Books are
the same too. They will talk as if all you
need to do to succeed is read these books!
By the way, while researching this, I even
encountered a “Success Formula” too!
Success is equal to… Purpose multiplied
by Passion, Failure subtracted from it, the
Square Root of Grace multiplied by Grit added
to it (ouch! this is hard for the math-haters!),
multiplied by Innovation, from which we need
to subtract the square of the sum of Negativity
and Comparison, and finally add the Cube of
Community (I love this part! Sharing is Caring!)
multiplied by Inspiration! This is the formula
for Success, it claimed! Formula.. FOR Success…!
The Secret Formula FOR Success.. But, you
know what.. There are cases where Success
IS the Formula! What is Success the Formula
for? Let’s see!
Namaste! Four Hundred and Thirty Four is about
Memory.. and Memorability.. How do we hook
you and pull you and catch you and make the
message STICK to you?!
Making it stick. Made to Stick. Chip and Dan
Heath are the authors. In this book, they
give six important things to keep in mind
if you want to ensure your message is kept
in mind. You may be a Writer. You may be a
Speaker. You may be a Teacher. You may even
be a Partner. If you want to say something
or write something or convey something, and
you want it to stick, probably this is something
you will have to keep in mind. They even give
it as a simple and easy-to-remember formula
— Success, that word, one formula for each
letter in that word.
The first one is S for Simple. It is quite
obvious, after just one look. That bulb isn’t
burning. This one is! Make it Simple. Make
it Straightforward. These are all famous sayings
that have stood the test of time. Short and
Sweet, as they say. It could be “Think Different”
from Apple, “Be the Change” from Mahatma
Gandhiji, “Aaruvadhu Chinam” or “Nyayampada
Urai” from the Aathicchoodi. “Jaisee Karnee
Vaisee Bharnee” and “Jahaan chaah Vahaan
Raah”.. There is even a rhythm and a rhyme
to it. Memorability goes up when you give
up all the other stuff and get to the core..
“Kadukai Thulaitthu Ezhu Kadalai Pugutthi”
they said, about the Thirukkural. It is the
CORE of the message. Everything else is chopped
off. Only what remains. Only the essence.
That is very important when you are trying
to convey a message. S for Simple. U?!
U is for the Unexpected. Just when you are
least expecting, it comes bang in front of
you, and slaps you on your cheek. “And they
lived happily ever after, for eleven days!”..
See? You didn’t expect it, did you? The
exact same thing happened when Bill Gates
was delivering a TED Talk. Nobody expected
it, when he was talking about malaria.. He
was saying, “More money is being pumped
into research for baldness (hey, I am not
bald, I shave my hair!) than money spent for
malaria! You look for money to spend on malaria
research, but it has all been eaten by baldness
research efforts! And, this is what he did,
on the TED stage. “Malaria is transmitted
by mosquitoes. And I brought some here so
you could experience this.. I will let those
roam around the auditorium a little bit…
there…! Why should only the poor people
have that experience?!” 2009 it was, when
he did this. It is still memorable. I share
it. No better example than this, for the use
of Physical Props during presentations. Thankfully,
they were not the infection-prone mosquitoes.
We won’t get malaria from their bite. But…
that’s what he did! Unexpected! Our mind?
It is a SUCKER for the unexpected. Novel.
Unusual. Never seen before. Unexpected. The
mind immediately starts begging — give me
more, give me more! U for Unexpected. S. U.
C. What is C for?
C.. one C.. is for Concrete! There is a website
called the Fischbowl.. By a person named Fisch.
Karl Fisch. It was way back in 2004, 2005,
when he talked about how education should
be, how it is done wrongly at that time, … and
the irony is it is still relevant, to this
day. A famous video from this website is “Shift
Happens!” and we have watched parts of it
in an earlier Quotidian. The four-minute video,
pretty short, called Shift Happens sent shockwaves
around the world. I am showing you just two
screengrabs from that video. See how Concrete
the message is! The first one says, “If
you are one
in a million in China, … careful, you are
actually having 1300 people just like you!”
Their population is so high! And then, he
slaps you again with India. A tidbit about
India’s humongous population. The population
of its youth. The burgeoning population. He
says, “The 25% of India’s population with
the highest IQs, is greater than the total
population of the United States..” and because
it is not very clear, he gives a better takeaway!
“Translation: India has more honors kids
than America HAS kids!” Every class has
a topper kid.. You take all these toppers
and send them to America, America has only
that many kids! Imagine! Something concrete,
something tangible, something that we can
immediately pick up and share. “Shareworthy”
comes from that!
The next C is for Credible. Credible doesn’t
mean you need a genius performer to tell you,
so you believe them.. JK Rowling tells you
that she wrote Harry Potter using a specific
pen, and you immediately plop for it.. No.
Not necessarily. Don’t you remember a Sachin
Tendulkar telling you to buy the Reynold’s
Pen? Look at this. It doesn’t get any better
than this! The Gillette ad plays, featuring
Lt Col M K Sinha, who says “It has been
19 years now, and I have been gliding the
Gillette Mach 3 comfortably over my seven-inch
battle scar. Seven thousand close shaves,
and who would know about close shaves better
than me?! Gillette Mach 3!” Remember this
ad? This man, a lieutenant colonel, injured
at war, a seven-inch scar, when he says, I
get a close shave, I know about close shaves..
what a play of words there.. And, how much
credibility flows naturally from there! Even
on such a irregular skin surface, if this
razor can shave smoothly, without cuts, that
is Credibility. So, when you share your message,
ensure there is Credibility. We have seen
this before. Logos. Ethos. Pathos. That Ethos
is Credibility. “Oh, she is saying this?
That means it is believable!”
The next is Emotional. E for Emotional. This
is the result from One Day International number
3148. Partnerships statistics.
Best performance by batters and bowlers.
Here is the Manhattan.
Perhaps, the Worms are going to be useful
too.
Fine? All good? Nice? Go on. The Show is over!
What was that match? This was that match!
This single moment, this photograph tells
us everything we need to know! Tells us stuff
that we simply couldn’t understand when
we were bombarded with data! Data is Logos.
Boring. Useful probably for a mathematician
and a statistician. Common mere mortals like
us won’t understand, won’t make sense,
of this. This? Sachin, lifting the World Cup..
Virat Kohli exclaiming, “Sachin had shouldered
the country’s responsibility all these years,
and perhaps, just once, let us bear Sachin
on OUR shoulders! This is our fortune, it
is our pride!” That moment! We all remember
what we were doing when we were watching this
match, and history was being written! Emotional!
So, if you want to convey a message, ensure
there is Emotion in what you do. Ensure it
evokes Emotions in the recipient. We talked
about memories, we even sauntered past the
seven sins of memory. If you have to embed
it deeply, it has to be multidimensional,
we had said. If you can load that little memory
with Emotion, perhaps Anger, perhaps Laughter,
perhaps Regret, if you can just bring some
kind of Emotion that attaches on to it, it
becomes a lot heavier, not easily dislodged.
It is a nifty Trick!
S is for Storyworthy. Can you spin a story
with this? Is it worthy of narrating a story?
Then, it becomes sticky, it becomes something
that goes deep into my mind, and it comes
to the tip of my tongue.. and the next time
I talk about something to somebody, I slip
it through.. That is how viral concepts spread.
The artist creator of this strip is R K Laxman.
A famous cartoonist. R K Narayan’s brother.
He created a character, a nameless character,
called The Common Man. It ran in the Times
of India for nearly forty years or so. Even
won awards for being the most circulated cartoon
character.. and so on. This Common Man! Why
did it become so famous? Without even a name?
With some silly torn clothes, an old man..
why? People who read and watched his cartoon
immediately related to that Common Man. He
will talk about the rising petrol prices.
Every one of us is impacted by this hiked
price. He will talk about salaries.. About
promotions. That middle-class mentality. He
will touch upon politicians. And greased palms.
Yes. We have suffered it all too. Suffering
in silence, you get a partner, you immediately
relate, and you lap it all up.. So, if you
can make something Storyworthy… What is
the story in this picture? The topic is the
“Man on the Moon” project. ISRO’s Space
Center — they bring a person in.. And why?
This is the message! “This is our man!”
exclaims one scientist.. “He can survive
without water, food, light, air, shelter..!”
Wow! So, that is Storyworthy! When you make
something Storyworthy, you are actually CREATING
a surrogate experience. When you listen to
a story, it is not the story that is amazing.
We become the hero / heroine in it, and it
is WE WHO feel AMAZING about it. When the
hero encounters hardships, you tell yourself,
yes, I have suffered these too! It is an “almost
experience”. And that is why stories stick!
We saw those SIX letters. Simple. Unexpected.
Concrete. Credible. Emotional. Storyworthy.
I see it like this though. A house. It is
burning. You are going to escape and run out.
What are you going to grab on your way out?
If there is something Simple, yes, you will
grab that and run. If it is Complicated, you
will not perhaps consider it. Unexpected.
Different. New. Nowhere else to be found.
If you have something special and unique like
that, … for example, at our home, we have
a Panchamukha Anjaneyar idol. Couldn’t get
it easily. Looked far and wide to buy one.
I will grab that, surely..! Concrete. If it
is easy to lift, with two proper handles,
will you consider it? Or, something that is
loosely bound, not solid, messy? Has to be
Concrete. What about Credibility? If you have
a JK Rowling-signed Harry Potter book with
you, .. unless you have a holographic proof
that this is the real thing, you may not consider
it.. What if this is something anybody could
have fudged anyway? Credibility is important.
What about Emotion? If you have something,
it might mean nothing to anybody else. It
might be just a little pencil. Almost down
to the last centimeter. But, if this is my
Grandpa’s? The one he used to write his
daily expenses account with? If I am having
this in his remembrance, … if that emotional
tug exists..? Somebody I knew once had a Dairy
Milk wrapper.. inside a book. I asked him,
what on earth are you holding on to that for?
It is going to attract ants, for godssake!
My partner, my life-partner, before we got
married, she gave a gift to me, a Dairy Milk
wrapper, a gift for someone you love.. That
is what would be written on that wrapper..
It was Dairy Milk’s slogan those days! That’s
Emotion. Loaded. Even if the house is all
but burnt down, I would rush out with that
wrapper! And, like I said, the story about
the gift for someone you love, it should be
Storyworthy. These are the things we would
want to rush out with, yes? That is what you
need to do when you are trying to convey a
message. Success. Hey.. Success? Spelling?
Succes? What happened to the last S? Oh, is
that the summary we just went through? Probably!
Talking about spellings, remember this guy?
At four hundred and thirty, he interviewed
me. His name? Micheal Jeshua Aswin. See the
spelling. Mi…Mee… Meh.. Micheal..? Michael?
Mike? I googled.. To check out if this is
a popular name at all.. And, this is what
Google suggested. Try again with this! Michael!
When you do these little spelling changes,
you are basically doing U.. Unexpected. Something
different.. Michael, we all know how to pronounce.
But, Micheal? How do you pronounce this? You
spend a little extra time. You move from subconscious,
unconscious, to conscious effort. And when
you do that, things become memorable. You
are not going to forget this man. His hair-style.
His dark glasses. And his name. Made to Stick!
Thank you! We will meet soon!